docs: development/architecture: Add initial architecture.md (#3311)
kubernetes-sigs/headlamp: docs/development/architecture.md

- Backend acts as a proxy and service layer. Handling authentication, RBAC, and API aggregation.
- Kubernetes API is the source of truth for cluster state.
- WebSocket connections follow a similar path. However they maintain persistent connections for real-time updates.

### WebSocket Lifecycle and Real-Time Updates

How does headlamp get real-time updates from Kubernetes clusters?

- Websockets are used for real-time updates from Kubernetes. 
- Browsers support a limited number of connections. Six usually.
- With Headlamp in the browser there is one websocket to `headlamp-server` backend. The `headlamp-server` connects to many websockets on different Kubernetes API servers. Overcoming the browser limit.

The diagram below illustrates how Headlamp manages WebSocket connections between the browser, the `headlamp-server`, and multiple Kubernetes API servers:

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[Browser] <-->|WebSocket| B[headlamp_server]
    B <-->|WebSocket| C[Kubernetes API Server]
    B <-->|WebSocket| D[Kubernetes API Server]
    B <-->|WebSocket| E[Kubernetes API Server]
```

### Plugins

#### Plugin Hosting Options

Where can plugins be hosted?

```mermaid

> graph TD

Reviewer: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3c4967f2-0676-4d78-8686-a29955861565)

Edges are duplicated in this graph, also does graph make sense here? Just a list with two items would work fine imho

Author: Made some improvements to this section.

    F[Plugins] -->|Can be| I[Private and Self Hosted]
    F -->|Or| J[Public and Indexed on Artifact Hub]
    F[Plugins] -->|Can be| I[Private and Self Hosted]
    F -->|Or| J[Public and Hosted on Artifact Hub]
```

#### Plugin Using and Bundling Options

How can plugins be enabled?

```mermaid

> graph TD

Reviewer: this also can be a list instead

Author: Made some improvements to this section.

    F[Plugins] -->|Can be| K[Bundled with a Headlamp Container Image]
    F -->|Or| L[Bundled with Headlamp Desktop App]
    F -->|Or| M[Installed by users in Desktop App]
```

## Source Map for Components

Headlamp consists of the following major components:
- **frontend/**: A React-based UI that interacts with the backend to manage clusters.
- **backend/**: A Go-based server that communicates with the Kubernetes API and the frontend.
- **app/**: A native Electron-based application for running Headlamp as a desktop app.
- **plugins/examples**: Example plugins demonstrating how to extend Headlamp.
- **plugins/headlamp-plugin**: A component to manage plugins in development and in deployment.

> - **plugins/examples**: Examples of how to achieve.

Reviewer: duplicated entry

Author: Fixed.

For each component we have a .stories.tsx file. For example Tables.stories.tsx for the Table.tsx component.

### Backend (headlamp-server)

- The [backend/](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/headlamp/blob/main/backend/) folder contains the source code for the headlamp-server binary.
- Entry point is [backend/cmd/headlamp.go](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/headlamp/blob/main/backend/cmd/headlamp.go)
- See the [Backend Documentation](https://headlamp.dev/docs/latest/development/backend/) for more information including a Quickstart.
- **Golang**: Written in the [Go programming language](https://golang.org/).
- **Gorilla**: Uses the Gorilla web toolkit for HTTP routing and middleware.
- **Kubernetes and Helm**: Integrates with Kubernetes and Helm Go packages.

Packages are stored in the [backend/pkg](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/headlamp/blob/main/backend/pkg/) folder. The packages available are cache, config, helm, kubeconfig, logger, plugins, portforward, and utils. Future code should be organized in packages. Some code in the cmd/ folder should move into separate packages.

For each module we have a test file. For example config.go comes with config_test.go.

> ### App

Reviewer: I feel like App is a bit too generic term, maybe we can specify that it is a Desktop App?

Author: Thanks, fixed. It's Desktop App now.

---
title: Architecture
sidebar_position: 0
---

## Introduction

This document explains how Headlamp is built. It covers the main parts of the system, how you can run it, how to customize it, and the ideas behind its design.

> Headlamp is a user-friendly and extensible Kubernetes UI. Designed to provide a seamless experience for managing Kubernetes clusters. It can connect to one or multiple Kubernetes clusters and can be deployed as a web app in-cluster or as a desktop app. You can customize Headlamp using plugins, which let you change how it looks and works to fit your needs.

Author: Joining it together would make the sentence too complex.

---

Maybe like this would make it flow better?

---

> Headlamp is a user-friendly and extensible Kubernetes UI. It has been designed to provide a seamless experience for managing Kubernetes clusters. It can connect to one or multiple Kubernetes clusters and can be deployed as a web app in-cluster or as a desktop app. You can customize Headlamp using plugins, which let you change how it looks and works to fit your needs.

---

Or as a list?

---

> Headlamp is an user-friendly and extensible Kubernetes UI. 
> 
> - Designed to provide a seamless experience for managing Kubernetes clusters. 
> - It can connect to one or many Kubernetes clusters and can be deployed as a web app in-cluster or as a desktop app. 
> - You can customize Headlamp using plugins, which let you change how it looks and works to fit your needs.

> Headlamp is a user-friendly and extensible Kubernetes UI. Designed to provide a seamless experience for managing Kubernetes clusters. It can connect to one or multiple Kubernetes clusters and can be deployed as a web app in-cluster or as a desktop app. You can customize Headlamp using plugins, which let you change how it looks and works to fit your needs.

Reviewer 2: First option looks better IMO, except replace "it has been designed" with "it is designed"

    D -->|Proxies| E[Kubernetes API]
    C -->|Loads| F[Plugins]
    D -->|Serves static web files and provides services to| C
```

#### Headlamp Web App running inside a Kubernetes Cluster

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[User] -->|Interacts with| G[Ingress/Gateway API]
    G -->|Routes to| B[Frontend, React]
    B -->|Sends requests to| C[Backend headlamp-server, Go]
    C -->|Proxies| D[Kubernetes API]
    C -->|Interacts with| E[Cluster Services]
    B -->|Loads| F[Plugins]
    C -->|Serves static web files and provides services to| B
    subgraph Kubernetes Cluster
        B
        C
        E
    end
```

Notes:
- Frontend handles user interactions and displays data.
- Backend acts as a proxy and service layer. Handling authentication, RBAC, and API aggregation.
- Kubernetes API is the source of truth for cluster state.
- WebSocket connections follow a similar path. However they maintain persistent connections for real-time updates.

### WebSocket Lifecycle and Real-Time Updates

How does headlamp get real-time updates from Kubernetes clusters?

- Websockets are used for real-time updates from Kubernetes. 
- Browsers support a limited number of connections. Six usually.

> - With Headlamp in the browser there is one websocket to `headlamp-server` backend. The `headlamp-server` connects to many websockets on different Kubernetes API servers. Overcoming the browser limit.

Author: I can see how this needs to be improved for flow. But the suggestion makes the sentence too complex.

> - With Headlamp in the browser there is one websocket to `headlamp-server` backend. The `headlamp-server` connects to many websockets on different Kubernetes API servers. Overcoming the browser limit.

Author: Ended up with this:
> How is the browser's WebSocket limit overcome? Headlamp uses one WebSocket from the browser to the `headlamp-server`. That server then opens many WebSockets to different Kubernetes API servers.

Resolving because:
> Feel free to make the final adjustments as you wish, LGTM after rebase

- **Headlamp Website**: Maintained in the [headlamp-k8s/website repo](https://github.com/headlamp-k8s/website). This contains things like the blog and the documentation. The website can be found at https://headlamp.dev/

### Makefile task entry point

The headlamp/ repo [Makefile](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/headlamp/blob/main/Makefile) contains targets for building and testing different components.

Here are some examples:

```shell
make backend
make backend-lint
make backend-test
make run-backend
make frontend
make frontend-lint
make frontend-test
make run-frontend
```

### Frontend

- Entry point is [frontend/src/index.tsx](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/headlamp/blob/main/frontend/src/index.tsx)
- See the [Frontend Documentation](https://headlamp.dev/docs/latest/development/frontend) for more information including a Quickstart.

A few key dependencies:

- **TypeScript**: Written in TypeScript.
- **React Components**: Modular and reusable components that form the UI.

> - **Mui**: For UI components it uses Mui a Material UI component library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **MUI**: For UI components, it uses MUI, a Material UI component library.
```

- **State Management**: Uses Redux for managing application state.
- **Routing**: Utilizes React Router for navigation within the app.
- **Npm**: Uses npm for package management.

> For each component we have a .stories.tsx file. For example Tables.stories.tsx for the Table.tsx component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each component, we have a .stories.tsx file (i.e. Tables.stories.tsx for the Table.tsx component).
```

Author: Joining it together would make the sentence too complex. Also, we have to avoid latin to meet plain language requirements.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like this then?
```suggestion
Each component has a .stories.tsx file: for example, Tables.stories.tsx for the Table.tsx component.
```

Author: Each component has a matching `.stories.tsx` file. For example, `Tables.stories.tsx` is the story file for the Table.tsx component.

```yaml
Each component has a matching `.stories.tsx` file. For example, `Tables.stories.tsx` is the story file for the `Table.tsx` component.
```

---

How about this? ^

## Design Principles and Core Behaviors

This section outlines the key ideas that guide how Headlamp is built and what must always be true about how it works.

- **Extensibility**: Headlamp supports plugins, so users can customize how it looks and works.
- **Multi-Cluster Support**: It can connect to and manage more than one Kubernetes cluster at the same time.
- **Security**: All actions must be secure and follow Kubernetes RBAC rules.
- **Accessibility**: The interface should be easy and comfortable for everyone to use.
- **Realtime**: It updates automatically when something changes in the cluster.
- **Consistency**: The UI should always show the current state of the cluster.
- **Adaptive UI**: The interface should adjust based on what the user is allowed to do. For example, if a user can’t edit something, they’ll only see a “view” button.

If you're planning a big change to Headlamp, please open an issue first. See the [contribution guide](https://headlamp.dev/docs/latest/faq/) for more info.

## Deployment Options

> See the [Installation Documentation](https://headlamp.dev/docs/latest/installation/) for more information.Including a Quickstart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the [Installation Documentation](https://headlamp.dev/docs/latest/installation/) for more information, including a Quickstart.
```

As mentioned above, Headlamp can be deployed as a container inside a Kubernetes cluster or as a Desktop app.

## Future Work

To see planned or in progress features, check the [Release Plan / Roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/headlamp-k8s/projects/1/views/1). It’s regularly updated, but it's a tentative plan. 

> Note: Since Headlamp is open source people contribute things that aren’t listed there. You can also explore:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: Since Headlamp is open source, people contribute things that aren’t listed there. You can also explore:
```
